---
title: VIM for sorta dummies
layout: post
categories: [tools]
---

Like many of my blog posts, this one is mostly to help me remember what I'm learning, but hopefully it helps some of you out. I've been getting my vim skills up to par, and here's a list of the basic commands that I've found useful in getting up and running:
<!--more-->

<ul>
	<li>If using Mac, switch your shell to Homebrew style. It's incredibly hard to see the cursor in the default shell and since a big part of Vim is cursor navigation, you'll be far behind the 8 ball if you don't make it easy to see.</li>
	<li>Another grumble I have is that the mouse no workie on Mac. Again, the point of vi is that your hands don't have to leave the keyboard but still...</li>
	<li>To turn line numbers on: :set nu or :set number.</li>
	<li>The basics: type "C" for command mode (i.e. input control commands) and "I" for insert mode, (i.e. edit text).</li>
	<li>Escape: ditch out of insert mode.</li>
	<li>Search for text: type "/searchtextgoeshere" and hit enter. Super valuable.</li>
	<li>Skip ahead from word to word: type "w" in command mode.</li>
	<li>Delete a whole word: put your cursor on the word and type in "dw" in command mode.</li>
	<li>Delete three words: type in "3dw".</li>
	<li>Delete a line: "dd".</li>
	<li>Undo your last change: "u".</li>
	<li>Save the file without exiting: ":w" - presumably for 'write file'.</li>
	<li>Save the file and exit: ":wq" - write file and quit.</li>
	<li>Discard changes and don't save: "q!".</li>
</ul>
&nbsp;
