---
title: On Consulting
layout: post
categories: consulting
---

As a college student, if someone asked me what I wanted to be after college, my answer was, "I want to be a consultant." To my recollection, that was true of very many of my peers. I'm not sure many of us even really understood what that term meant. I'm guessing (and hoping) most of my peers do now!

In retrospect, it's pretty clear why 'consultant' was a quick and easy answer for a college student. After all, 'consultant' comes with it some degree of prestige; after all, how can you be a 'consultant' without knowledge? Powerful knowledge, I'm sure we surmised on some level. The painful irony for most of us graduating was that it would be many years before our dream was realized; most of us discovered soon after starting our first job that to 'consult' you first had to know something! (ouch)

After many years in the IT business in a variety of client-facing roles, I think I can now speak (or in this case write) upon what I regard as the key attributes that consultants have - or in the case of aspiring consultants, what skills they should work to develop.

* Consultants have listening skills

Consultants are careful listeners. Most consulting engagements begin with a description of the problem. Without careful and attentive listening, the consultant might miss a key element of the problem or what the client has already done to try and solve it.

On a more subtle level, the consultant is working to understand body language, the politics and relationships of the people in the room, and likewise taking note of facial expressions or a note of frustration in the client's voice. Consultants hold tight to their listening skills, knowing that the ability to truly hear and understand a client's business problem can sometimes surmount hurdles in other areas. 

A technique that can be employed (and I recommend it for those getting their start) is Active Listening. Active Listening is employed in a variety of places beyond consulting, but I've found it quite useful in this area because it is very difficult to miscommunicate or find yourself off in "left field", waiting for the client to meet you there.

Knowing that communication is a two-way process, one of the most important things a consultant can 'message' back to the customer is empathy. I've seen consultants fail in their job because the customer never really believed that the consultant cared about their problem. Having empathy can mean the difference between being effective at effecting change and not.

In consulting, very often the best advice I give is: "Understand your client!" When sending a message, it is very important to understand the receiver of that message, and how they will receive it. Enough said, or at least as much as I can say here!

* Consultants seek business value

A common question that any consultant will grapple with is: "Which change is worth pursuing?" Within your client organization, opinions may vary widely on what improvements or changes should be made. Moreover, your own success will be judged based not just on your ability to effect change, but rather did you recommend and pursue the "right" change?

The answer is: "Seek business value." This sounds like a cliche, but it's not. The consultant will try to predict and measure the impact of a particular change using metrics. In business, this usually means either money or time - made or saved. Metrics can be a tremendous pain at times, particularly if you're dealing with a metric-poor client who may not have much to offer. That said, woe to the consultant who inflicts significant change on an organization without selecting or validating that change with projected business metrics.

Newer consultants still trying to find their way may find themselves filled with uncertainty surrounding what changes to pursue. While business metrics help us select appropriate changes, where do those ideas come from? The answer - from the consultant's toolkit, with some creativity tossed into the mix. 

* Consultants have a toolkit

Possibly the easiest of all these to understand, yet the hardest to get. A "toolkit" can be understood to be 'subject matter expertise' - although given that I'm from a software background, I prefer the term 'domain expert'. Simply put, you need to have some background in what you're consulting in, and to a certain extent, an understanding of the client's business space. With experience, you come to know common solutions for common problems and become skilled at devising new solutions. 

The best consultants I've met are interdisciplinary - they combine knowledge of business fundamentals with deep technical expertise in a few different spaces and can quickly learn enough of the client's business to engage quickly and establish their expertise quickly. As you might imagine, no client wants to pay a consultant to get up to speed on their business model, their cost structure, etc. A consultant brings to the table a working knowledge of a what models are successful for a particular type of business.

* Consultants can influence

As a consultant, your job is likely to bring change to the organization. To do this, you'll likely need to "win hearts and minds". Consider this: what good is a high-value solution if no one buys into it? In many ways, a consultant's success is limited not just by their toolkit or the effectiveness of their proposed solution, but very often the degree to which they can achieve buy-in.

Influence is a very personal thing. Each person has different ways of influencing others; some win on likability, others on credibility. Influence isn't substitute for other skills and techniques; but influence is often the difference maker in getting those solutions implemented.

* Consultants are invested in their client's success

Great consultants are truly invested in their client's success. For me, 'investment' means 'caring about the client's problem with a sense of urgency and importance.'

One of the truisms I've seen is that a failed consultant will very rarely be portrayed as unintellgient, or unwise, or unable to effect change. Instead, that failed consultant will usually be described by the client as not caring, or being mostly motivated to help themselves first, and the client second.

A good consultant internalizes the knowledge that if they fail in their job, people's lives and livelihoods will be affected in a very negative way. This means going above and beyond to help the customer succeed. Consultants take their jobs seriously, and understand that if the problem was easy to solve, or if the stakes weren't high, they wouldn't have been called in the first place!




